Multilingual Dictionaries of Moral-Indicating Words
Last Update: 07.07.2023
Author & contact: Maria Becker (maria.becker@gs.uni-heidelberg.de)

When using this resource, please cite:
Becker, Maria / Brocai, Bruno / Tapken, Lars (2023): Detection and analysis of moralization practices across languages and domains. In: Trawiński, Beata / Kupietz, Marc / Proost, Kristel / Zinken, Jörg (Hg.): 10th International Contrastive Linguistics Conference (ICLC-10), 18-21 July, 2023, Mannheim, Germany. Book of abstracts. Mannheim: IDS-Verlag. S. 147-148.

(German version below)

High value and delimitation words such as freedom, equality, injustice or unfair are an essential property of moralizations, and therefore can be used for detecting moralizations in texts. In our project Annotation and Analysis of Moralization Practices, we also utilized such words in order to create corpora of moralizing speech acts.
For this purpose, a dictionary with moral-indicating words was created. First, a manually created seed set (Felder/Müller 2021) containing 130 German high value and delimitation words was expanded with words that have similar co-occurrence profiles. The underlying assumption is that words are similar if their co-occurrence profiles are similar (cf. Perkuhn et al. 2012: 128). The search for words with similar co-occurrence profiles was carried out using the co-occurrence database CCDB, a “corpus-linguistic thinking and experimentation platform for the research and theoretical justification of systemic-structural properties of cohesion relations between the constituents of language use” (Belica 2011: 162). The database is based on a sub-corpus of the German reference corpus consisting of 2.2 billion words.
The words collected in this way were then manually viewed and cleaned up. The result is DiMi (Dictionary of Moral-Indicating Words), a dictionary with around 1500 positive moral-indicating words and 1500 negative moral-indicating words. This lexicon, in contrast to existing moral lexicons, contains not only moral high value and delimination words, but also words that indicate potentially moralizing contexts without explicitly expressing a moral value, such as child poverty (which refers to a morally clearly degrading condition).
To create the English, Italian, and French datasets, DiMi was automatically translated into the three languages using DeepL. The translations were then cleaned up manually.
DiMi is available in four languages: German, English, Italian, and French. In addition, there is a lemmatized version for all four dictionaries, which contains all the basic forms of moral-indicating words.
Moreover, for each dictionary we provide a subset of particularly typical moral-indicating words  (“Selection”).

Multilingual Wörterbücher moralindizierender Vokabeln 

Verweise auf moralische Werte mittels Hochwert- bzw. Delimitationswörtern wie bspw. Freiheit, gleichberechtigt, Ungerechtigkeit oder unlauter sind eine wesentliche Eigenschaft von Moralisierungen. Diese Schlagwörter lassen sich bereits auf der Textoberfläche erkennen. Daher bieten sie sich zur automatisierten Detektion (möglicher) Moralisierungen an. Dementsprechend wurden auch in dem Projekt Annotation und automatische Analyse von Moralisierungspraktiken in verschiedenen Wissensdomänen Hochwert- bzw. Delimitationswörter zur Erstellung der Korpora moralisierender Sprachhandlungen verwendet. 
Hierfür wurde ein Wörterbuch mit moralindizierenden Wörtern erstellt. Zunächst wurde ein manuell erstelltes seed set (Felder/Müller 2021), das 130 deutsche Hochwert- und Delimitationswörter beinhaltet, um Wörter mit ähnlichen Kookkurrenzprofilen erweitert. Die dahinterstehende Annahme ist, dass Wörter einander ähnlich sind, wenn sich ihre Kookkurrenzprofile ähneln (vgl. Perkuhn et al. 2012: 128). Die Suche nach Wörtern mit ähnlichen Kookkurrenzprofilen erfolgte mithilfe der Kookkurrenzdatenbank CCDB, eine „korpuslinguistische Denk- und Experimentierplattform für die Erforschung und theoretische Begründung von systemisch-strukturellen Eigenschaften von Kohäsionsrelationen zwischen den Konstituenten des Sprachgebrauchs“ (Belica 2011: 162). Die Datenbank basiert auf einem aus 2,2 Milliarden laufenden Textwörtern bestehendes Teilkorpus des Deutschen Referenzkorpus. 
Die so ermittelten Wörter wurden anschließend manuell gesichtet und bereinigt. Das Resultat ist DiMi (Dictionary of Moral-Indicating words), ein Wörterbuch mit rund 1500 positiven moralindizierenden Vokabeln und 1500 negativen moralindizierenden Vokabeln. Durch diese Vorgehensweise enthält dieses Lexikon, anders als bereits existierende Morallexika, nicht nur moralische Hochwert- und Deliminationswörter, sondern auch Wörter, die Hinweise auf poten-tiell moralisierende Kontexte geben, ohne einen moralischen Wert zum Ausdruck zu bringen. Beispiele hierfür sind etwa die Wörter Deckmantel (das auf Vorwürfe der Unlauterkeit oder Unaufrichtigkeit verweist) oder Kinderarmut (das auf einen moralisch eindeutig abzuwertenden Zustand referiert). 
Zur Erstellung der englischen, italienischen und  französischen Datensätze wurde DiMi wurde mithilfe von DeepL automatisch in die drei Sprachen übersetzt. Die Übersetzungen wurden daraufhin manuell bereinigt.
DiMi liegt somit in vier Sprachen vor: Deutsch, Englisch, Italienisch und Französisch. Darüber hinaus gibt es für alle vier Wörterbücher eine lemmatisierte Version, in der alle Grundformen der moralindizierenden Wörter enthalten sind.
Zusätzlich liegt für jedes der Wörterbücher ein Subset besonders typischer moralindizierender Wörter vor (“Selection”).
